docs: Rework the Build your first app guide for 3.5 (#557)
serverpod/serverpod_docs: docs/05-build-your-first-app/01-creating-endpoints.md

---
title: Create your first endpoint
sidebar_class_name: sidebar-icon-get-started-step-1
slug: /get-started/creating-endpoints
description: Build a Serverpod endpoint that turns a list of ingredients into an AI-generated recipe with Gemini, and call it from your Flutter app.
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD025 -->

# Create your first endpoint

You'll build a recipe generator: a Serverpod endpoint that takes a list of ingredients, asks Google's Gemini API for a recipe, and returns it to your Flutter app. Along the way you'll see that calling your server is as simple as calling a local method.

Prefer to have an AI agent build an app for you? Follow the [Quickstart](../04-get-started/02-quickstart.md) instead. This guide takes the hands-on path: you'll build the recipe app yourself, so you understand each piece.

:::info

> The server is the right place for work you can't or shouldn't do in the app, such as calling an API secured by a secret key, accessing a database, or sending push notifications and emails. Here, it keeps your Gemini API key off the client.

Reviewer: Sometimes we call the serverpod application and 'app', so let's be specific about what type of app here:

```suggestion
The server is the right place for work you can't or shouldn't do in the Flutter app, such as calling an API secured by a secret key, accessing a database, or sending push notifications and emails. Here, it keeps your Gemini API key off the client.
```

:::

## Before you start

- [Serverpod installed](../04-get-started/01-installation.md). Run `serverpod version` to confirm it works.

> - A free Gemini API key. Create one on [Google AI Studio](https://aistudio.google.com/app/apikey); it's free, but you need to sign in with a Google account.

Reviewer: We leave the user without guidance on how to create an API key. Consider adding a screenshot and instructions, or just linking to a high-quality guide maintained by the Google AI Studio team, to explain the steps.

### Add your Gemini API key

Gemini is Google's generative AI model. Your server sends it the ingredients and gets a recipe back, and the API key authenticates those calls.

Add your key to `config/passwords.yaml` in the server package. Git ignores this file, so your key stays out of version control.

```yaml
# magic_recipe_server/config/passwords.yaml
development:
  geminiApiKey: '--- Your Gemini Api Key ---'
```

Then add the Dartantic AI package to the server. It provides a single interface for talking to AI providers, including Gemini:

```bash
$ cd magic_recipe_server
$ dart pub add dartantic_ai
```

## Start the app

From the project's root folder, start everything with one command:

```bash
$ serverpod start
```

`serverpod start` generates your code, starts the server with its built-in PostgreSQL database (no Docker required), and opens the Flutter app in Chrome. The app that opens is the default Serverpod starter: enter your name, tap **Send to Server**, and the server responds with a greeting.

> Leave `serverpod start` running. It watches your project, so every time you save a file it regenerates the necessary code and hot-reloads the app. You'll rely on this for the rest of the guide instead of restarting anything by hand.

Reviewer: "...so every time you save a file it regenerates the necessary code and hot-reloads the app." 
Discussion: Shall we call it the whole Serverpod stack, "the app", or should we speak in terms of backend or server and Flutter app?

I like the idea of seeing the whole full-stack as "the app".

  }
}
```

The endpoint reads your Gemini key from `session.passwords`, which Serverpod populates from the `passwords.yaml` file you edited earlier.

:::info

> Endpoint methods take a `Session` as their first parameter and return a typed `Future` or `Stream`. You can pass and return primitive types or any [serializable model](../06-concepts/02-models/01-models.md). The class name's `Endpoint` suffix is dropped on the client, so `RecipeEndpoint` is called through `client.recipe`. See [How it works](../04-get-started/03-how-it-works.md) for how that call reaches the server.

Reviewer: Some minor simplification of the language:

```suggestion
Endpoint methods take a `Session` as their first parameter and return a typed `Future` or `Stream`. You can pass and return primitive types or any model defined in a .spy.yaml file. The class name's `Endpoint` suffix is dropped on the client, so `RecipeEndpoint` is called via `client.recipe`. See [How it works](../04-get-started/03-how-it-works.md) for how that call reaches the server.
```

            decoration: const InputDecoration(
              hintText: 'Enter your ingredients',
            ),
          ),
          const SizedBox(height: 16),
          ElevatedButton(
            onPressed: _loading ? null : _callGenerateRecipe,
            child: _loading
                ? const Text('Loading...')
                : const Text('Generate Recipe'),
          ),
          const SizedBox(height: 16),
          Expanded(
            child: SingleChildScrollView(
              child: ResultDisplay(
                resultMessage: _resultMessage,
                errorMessage: _errorMessage,
              ),
            ),
          ),
        ],
      ),
    );
  }
}
```

`client` comes from `main.dart`, where the template already wired it to talk to your server, and `ResultDisplay` is reused from `greetings_screen.dart`.

Now show the recipe screen instead of the greeting demo. In `magic_recipe_flutter/lib/main.dart`, add the import:

```dart
import 'screens/recipe_screen.dart';
```

Then, in the `MyHomePage` widget, change the body from `GreetingsScreen` to `RecipeScreen`:

```dart
      body: const RecipeScreen(),
```

> Save. UI edits like this would normally hot reload, but adding the endpoint also changed the generated client. The app's `client` is created once in `main()`, which only re-runs on a restart, so the app needs a hot restart to pick up the new `client.recipe` endpoint. Press `R` in the `serverpod start` terminal.

Reviewer: Press R in terminal is easily missed.

Consider putting it inside a code block, like a bash command would, to emphasize that it is an action.

          const SizedBox(height: 16),
          Expanded(
            child: SingleChildScrollView(
              child: ResultDisplay(
                resultMessage: _resultMessage,
                errorMessage: _errorMessage,
              ),
            ),
          ),
        ],
      ),
    );
  }
}
```

`client` comes from `main.dart`, where the template already wired it to talk to your server, and `ResultDisplay` is reused from `greetings_screen.dart`.

Now show the recipe screen instead of the greeting demo. In `magic_recipe_flutter/lib/main.dart`, add the import:

```dart
import 'screens/recipe_screen.dart';
```

Then, in the `MyHomePage` widget, change the body from `GreetingsScreen` to `RecipeScreen`:

```dart
      body: const RecipeScreen(),
```

Save. UI edits like this hot-reload on their own, but adding the endpoint also changed the generated client, and the app's `client` is created once in `main()`, which only re-runs on a restart. Press `R` in the `serverpod start` terminal to hot restart so the app picks up the new `client.recipe` endpoint.

Then enter some ingredients and tap **Generate Recipe**. The app calls your endpoint and displays the result:

> ![Example Flutter App](/img/getting-started/endpoint-chrome-result.png)

Reviewer: The button says "Send to server", while the code and guide set it to "Generate Recipe". Update the screenshot.
